---
layout: default
title: 6.6 Class 6 Reinforcement Exercises
nav_order: 7
---

# 6.6 Class 6 Reinforcement Exercises

## Exercise 6-1: Create ERD From Chess Tables

During the Applied Activity 6.5 video, you exported the `mydb` table structure into a CSV file for importing into Lucidchart. Create an ERD for the chess game database (the `games`, `moves`, and `players` tables). Ensure that the cardinality for each relationship indicates the min and max. Download a PDF, name it `6-1-chess-game.pdf` and place it in the `public/exercises` folder.

## Exercise 6-2: HR Database ERD

Create a new ERD for a human resources database. Create tables called `employees`, `paychecks`, and `time_entries`. For every employee, there are 0 or more paychecks and time entries. The `employee_id` should be a foreign key in both the `paychecks` and `time_entries` tables. Beyond that, select your own fields and data types for each table (the `employees` table could get quite large, so just think of 5-10 fields that seem most important to you), using snake_case for the field names (underscores between words, all lower-case). Ensure that relationships show appropriate cardinalities, including the min and max.

Once you are done, export as a PDF, name it `6-2-hr-database.pdf`, and place it in the `public/exercises` folder.

## Exercise 6-3: HR Database Tables

Create the database tables defined in your ERD for exercise 6-2. You can create them by hand using SQL, use the Create New Table feature in phpMyAdmin, or use the ERD Export feature in Lucidchart. Make sure that all ID fields are `AUTO_INCREMENT`.

**Remember** to run `./dump-mysql.sh` in the Terminal after creating your tables!

## Exercise 6-4: HR Classes

Create a new folder in `public/exercises` named `6-4-hr-classes`. Inside the folder, create classes named `Employee`, `Paycheck`, and `TimeEntry`, each in its own `.php` file. Note that we use plural for table names and singular for classes. Create the same class properties as the fields that you have defined in the table. Use camelCase for property names even though snake_case was used for field names. Try your best to select PHP data types for properties that closely match the MySQL data types of the fields. In the `Employee` class, add a public array property called `$timeEntries` and another called `$paychecks`, which will be used to store the related records.

## Exercise 6-5: Normalization

Database design techniques include the ability to identify and design five normalization levels: first normal form through fifth normal form. Search the Internet for information on these techniques and describe how to identify and design each normalization level. Create a file named `6-5-normalization.md` in the `public/exercises` folder and place your findings in that file.
